# StructWiz:A  web application for protein visualization 
## Video Demo:  [DEMO]()
## Description:
### Introduction
**My project is a one-person project which aims to create a web application which allows users to visualize proteins of their choice, inspired by [PDB](https://www.rcsb.org/) and [PyMOL](https://www.pymol.org/).**
In order to implement this, I drew upon what was taught in Week 9 on Flask and in particular, 
I extended the CS50 Finance Problem from Problem Set 9. I also decided to make minimal use of CS50-specific imports to ensure that this application can be readily used in the real world. I hope every user who uses this application comes to appreciate the beauty of proteins, which act as the workhorses of the cell, and are in a very real sense the reason that you (the reader) and I are alive. Most importantly, I hope you have great fun playing around with this application, while simultaneously coming to appreciate the complexity and  beauty of proteins and Life in general.
### Implementation
### Files in static:
I have used a gif of a DNA molecule as an error message image (analogous to the Grumpy cat in CS50 Finance).(Reference:[https://biotech.iitm.ac.in/](https://biotech.iitm.ac.in/)) All other images have been obtained from [Rosetta Commons](https://rosettacommons.org/) and [PyMOL](https://www.pymol.org/), except for StructWiz.jpg. StructWiz.jpg is the logo of my web application and I designed the logo using
[Canva](https://www.canva.com/en_in/login/).The images of proteins used in the logo are images of the [Malaria parasite PTEX core complex](https://pdb101.rcsb.org/motm/299) and the [SARS-Cov-2 spike protein](https://pdb101.rcsb.org/motm/246).I have chosen to retain the  I ♥ VALIDATOR icon and functionality from CS50 Finance too. The static folder also includes a css file : styles.css which is very similar to the styles.css from the CS50 Finance Problem except for the inclusion of a few other classes like pink
which I defined, in order to make my web application look a little more aesthetically pleasing.
### Files in template and user interface:
The user interface of my web application is inspired by that of [Rosetta Commons](https://rosettacommons.org/). I wanted the logo to be unique and different though, so I designed the logo of StructWiz (a jpg file basically) using [Canva](https://www.canva.com/en_in/login/). I decided to make login and registration optional, as the purpose of my web application is primarily to visualize proteins and help the user learn more about them. So, it does not seem necessary for me to make login and registration compulsory as my web application does not need to remember user preferences to work satisfactorily.The template folder contains the following html files: layout.html (which includes all details of the layout. This layout.html page is used as the primary layout for all of my html pages. It is very similar to that of CS50 Finance, with the exception of a few minor changes.), apology.html (to render apologies to the user if user input is invalid or something goes wrong. I have used a gif called dna1.gif as my error message image, instead of the Grumpy cat, in keeping with the biology theme.), contact.html (for the contact page, which is basically a static webpage which can contain my contact details (at present, I have used a dummy email ID as a standin for my actual email ID, for privacy reasons.)), documentation.html (for the documentation page which is also a static webpage. The purpose of the page is to rationalize my design decisions and redirect to this README.md file for a more detailed explanation), FAQs.html (for the FAQs page which is also a static webpage. The purpose of the page is to answer common questions that users may have about visualizing proteins in general. The page also serves to direct the user to some useful resources for further learning.), index.html (for the home page, which is more dynamic. The home page shows the logo of StructWiz, designed using Canva and asks the user what they would like to do today. Based on the user's response via the dropdown menu, they are redirected to the appropriate page. I took care of the validation of user input on both the server-side and client-side,taking to heart the instruction to "Never trust the user" and thus guard my application from malicious attacks. I took care of the redirection in app.py.), register.html (which displays the register form, very similar to that of CS50 Finance and implemented in much the same way, except for the fact that this time I used SQLAlchemy instead of the CS50 SQL library on the server-side), login.html (which displays the login form, very similar to that of CS50 Finance and implemented in much the same way, except for the fact that this time I used SQLAlchemy instead of the CS50 SQL library on the server-side) , **vis.html ( for visualization of a protein, based on its PDB ID and (optionally) Unique entity identifier. Once the form has been submitted via POST, the vis_new_window.html page is rendered) and vis_new_window.html (This extends the vis.html page and displays a static visualization of the protein using the RCSB PDB server. I also used the lookup function on the server-side to display the name of the protein above the static visualization. Users can also download the PDB file for this protein and/or view the protein in 3-D more dynamically using RCSB PDB).**
### app.py and helpers.py : The Application
As a direct consequence of my decision to make login and registration optional, I have not used the loginrequired decorator anywhere in app.py. None of the routes require login, in accordance with my desire to propagate information as freely as possible. Login and registration are possible though and accordingly, I have the appropriate routes for this purpose in app.py. Login and registration are implemented in almost exactly the same way as in CS50 Finance except for the fact that I have used SQLAlchemy instead of the CS50 SQL library for all CRUD operations, in accordance with my desire to minimise CS50-specific imports. I also have routes for a documentation page, FAQs page, contact page in addition to the home page and the visualization page.The contact page, documentation page and FAQs page are more or less static webpages but the other pages incorporate the dynamic capabilities of Flask. Since the contact page, documentation page and FAQs page are more or less static webpages, I have simply rendered these pages for the appropriate routes in app.py.The home page is more dynamic and has a dropdown menu with 2 options: Visualize something and Learn something. If the user chooses to Visualize something, they are redirected to the visualisation page and if the user chooses to Learn something,
they are redirected to the FAQs page. Choosing any other option or leaving the option blank redirects the user to the apology page (using the apology function defined in helpers.py).**The visualization page uses a lookup function defined in helpers.py to lookup the user-supplied PDB ID using the syntax specified in [Data API](https://data.rcsb.org/index.html#data-api). I use the information obtained as JSON from the API to display the name of the protein once the form asking for user input has been submitted using POST. I also use the RCSB PDB server to display a static visualisation of the protein based on its PDB ID. The optional entity identifier is used to display the appropriate link for a more dynamic 3-D view on RCSB PDB. If the user fails to provide an entity identifier, the entity identifier is set to 1 by default. All inputs provided by the user are validated in order to ensure that the web application remains secure.**
### users.db
For login and registration, I used SQLAlchemy to keep track of registered users in a .db file called 
users.db. The schema is a simplified version of the schema used for finance.db in the CS50 Finance problem. The username must be unique (as I have set it as a UNIQUE INDEX using sqlite3 in the terminal), otherwise an IntegrityError will occur when using SQLAlchemy(analogous to the ValueError which oocurs when using the CS50 SQL library). I used a try-except to handle exceptions within the register route 
and render apologies as appropriate while validating user input within app.py.
### Conclusion
I decided to implement a web application for protein visualization called StructWiz as my final project, because of my passion for understanding how the structure and dynamics of proteins determine function. Week 9 of CS50x emboldened me to make my own web application and thereby apply what I have learned through CS50x. The web application is meant to be educational, so I included a few static web pages such as documentation and FAQs in order to serve this purpose. I had great fun implementing this web application and I hope you have as much fun using it!
## Acknowledgement
This README would not be complete without an acknowledgement of everyone who has made this project and indeed the CS50x journey possible. I would particularly like to thank Prof.David Malan for his insightful and engaging lectures , all the TAs for all the work they have done to make this course possible whether it be the sessions or the shorts or the problem set discussions and of course, the CS50 Duck, ddb , which was particularly useful when I was struggling with the SQLAlchemy syntax for this project. I would also like to thank my family, who always encouraged me and motivated me to keep going and enthusistically tried out my application. I would like to thank each and every person who made this CS50x course possible. I could not have done this without you!